---
title: Emacs
layout: default
nav_order: 3
#has_children: true
---

# Emacs

I've been working with [Emacs](https://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/) as my main
editor and development environment for well over 15 years. It has quite a steep
learning curve in the beginning, but after many years of customizing it to my
liking and committing countless keyboard shortcuts to muscle memory, I've become
so efficient with it that using another editor feels awkward and clumsy in
comparison.

**If you're completely new to Emacs,** you might want to look at these resources:

+ [Getting Started with Emacs: A Beginner's
  Guide](https://lucidmanager.org/productivity/getting-started-with-emacs/) from
  the Lucid Manager, who has [a whole series of articles on
  Emacs](https://lucidmanager.org/tags/emacs/).
+ [Emacs for Social
  Science](https://gitlab.com/jabranham/emacs-for-social-science) and/or [An
  Emacs Starter Kit for the Social
  Sciences](https://kieranhealy.org/resources/emacs-starter-kit/) for an Emacs
  setup that's a bit nicer than the out-of-the-box experience.
+ [On using Emacs for data work with
  R](https://gist.github.com/davebraze/ff95762bea2868f52942c0bb2d247b29) for
  another perspective on why and how to use Emacs.

Emacs comes with a comprehensive manual, which [Emacs
Docs](https://emacsdocs.org/) compiles into a nice website. While this doesn't
make for a good, compact tutorial, it might come in handy as a reference.

One of my favorite examples of what you can achieve when you really master your
tools is Karthik Chikmagalur [entering LaTeX math equations into
Emacs](https://karthinks.com/img/latex-full-demo-1.mp4) at an insane speed,
using a setup he describes in detail in [LaTeX Input for Impatient
Scholars](https://karthinks.com/software/latex-input-for-impatient-scholars/).
{: .callout .callout-primary }

## Emacs Distributions

Installing Emacs by itself will likely not give you a great user experience, as
Emacs really only shines when utilizing the large number of awesome packages
that exist for it. Nowadays, there are a couple of Emacs distributions that aim
to provide a fully-featured Emacs experience right out of the box.

The most popular of these appear to be [Spacemacs](https://www.spacemacs.org/),
[Doom](https://github.com/hlissner/doom-emacs) and
[Prelude](https://prelude.emacsredux.com/). I haven't used any of those, but if
I was just starting out with Emacs today (and didn't have a whole repository
with [extensively customized Emacs config
files](https://github.com/mbollmann/linux-essentials/tree/master/dot-files/.emacs.d)
already), I'd probably give them a closer look. _(Alternatively, if you want to
learn how Emacs works so you can customize it yourself, the "starter kits"
mentioned above might provide a better starting point.)_
